<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 3</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4>Chapter 3</h4>
<p>
Kitty was particularly glad of a chance of being alone with her husband, for
she had noticed the shade of mortification that had passed over his
face—always so quick to reflect every feeling—at the moment when he
had come onto the terrace and asked what they were talking of, and had got no
answer.
</p>
<p>
When they had set off on foot ahead of the others, and had come out of sight of
the house onto the beaten dusty road, marked with rusty wheels and sprinkled
with grains of corn, she clung faster to his arm and pressed it closer to her.
He had quite forgotten the momentary unpleasant impression, and alone with her
he felt, now that the thought of her approaching motherhood was never for a
moment absent from his mind, a new and delicious bliss, quite pure from all
alloy of sense, in the being near to the woman he loved. There was no need of
speech, yet he longed to hear the sound of her voice, which like her eyes had
changed since she had been with child. In her voice, as in her eyes, there was
that softness and gravity which is found in people continually concentrated on
some cherished pursuit.
</p>
<p>
“So you’re not tired? Lean more on me,” said he.
</p>
<p>
“No, I’m so glad of a chance of being alone with you, and I must
own, though I’m happy with them, I do regret our winter evenings
alone.”
</p>
<p>
“That was good, but this is even better. Both are better,” he said,
squeezing her hand.
</p>
<p>
“Do you know what we were talking about when you came in?”
</p>
<p>
“About jam?”
</p>
<p>
“Oh, yes, about jam too; but afterwards, about how men make
offers.”
</p>
<p>
“Ah!” said Levin, listening more to the sound of her voice than to
the words she was saying, and all the while paying attention to the road, which
passed now through the forest, and avoiding places where she might make a false
step.
</p>
<p>
“And about Sergey Ivanovitch and Varenka. You’ve noticed?...
I’m very anxious for it,” she went on. “What do you think
about it?” And she peeped into his face.
</p>
<p>
“I don’t know what to think,” Levin answered, smiling.
“Sergey seems very strange to me in that way. I told you, you
know....”
</p>
<p>
“Yes, that he was in love with that girl who died....”
</p>
<p>
“That was when I was a child; I know about it from hearsay and tradition.
I remember him then. He was wonderfully sweet. But I’ve watched him since
with women; he is friendly, some of them he likes, but one feels that to him
they’re simply people, not women.”
</p>
<p>
“Yes, but now with Varenka ... I fancy there’s something....”
</p>
<p>
“Perhaps there is.... But one has to know him.... He’s a peculiar,
wonderful person. He lives a spiritual life only. He’s too pure, too
exalted a nature.”
</p>
<p>
“Why? Would this lower him, then?”
</p>
<p>
“No, but he’s so used to a spiritual life that he can’t
reconcile himself with actual fact, and Varenka is after all fact.”
</p>
<p>
Levin had grown used by now to uttering his thought boldly, without taking the
trouble of clothing it in exact language. He knew that his wife, in such
moments of loving tenderness as now, would understand what he meant to say from
a hint, and she did understand him.
</p>
<p>
“Yes, but there’s not so much of that actual fact about her as
about me. I can see that he would never have cared for me. She is altogether
spiritual.”
</p>
<p>
“Oh, no, he is so fond of you, and I am always so glad when my people
like you....”
</p>
<p>
“Yes, he’s very nice to me; but....”
</p>
<p>
“It’s not as it was with poor Nikolay ... you really cared for each
other,” Levin finished. “Why not speak of him?” he added.
“I sometimes blame myself for not; it ends in one’s forgetting. Ah,
how terrible and dear he was!... Yes, what were we talking about?” Levin
said, after a pause.
</p>
<p>
“You think he can’t fall in love,” said Kitty, translating
into her own language.
</p>
<p>
“It’s not so much that he can’t fall in love,” Levin
said, smiling, “but he has not the weakness necessary.... I’ve
always envied him, and even now, when I’m so happy, I still envy
him.”
</p>
<p>
“You envy him for not being able to fall in love?”
</p>
<p>
“I envy him for being better than I,” said Levin. “He does
not live for himself. His whole life is subordinated to his duty. And
that’s why he can be calm and contented.”
</p>
<p>
“And you?” Kitty asked, with an ironical and loving smile.
</p>
<p>
She could never have explained the chain of thought that made her smile; but
the last link in it was that her husband, in exalting his brother and abasing
himself, was not quite sincere. Kitty knew that this insincerity came from his
love for his brother, from his sense of shame at being too happy, and above all
from his unflagging craving to be better—she loved it in him, and so she
smiled.
</p>
<p>
“And you? What are you dissatisfied with?” she asked, with the same
smile.
</p>
<p>
Her disbelief in his self-dissatisfaction delighted him, and unconsciously he
tried to draw her into giving utterance to the grounds of her disbelief.
</p>
<p>
“I am happy, but dissatisfied with myself....” he said.
</p>
<p>
“Why, how can you be dissatisfied with yourself if you are happy?”
</p>
<p>
“Well, how shall I say?... In my heart I really care for nothing whatever
but that you should not stumble—see? Oh, but really you mustn’t
skip about like that!” he cried, breaking off to scold her for too agile
a movement in stepping over a branch that lay in the path. “But when I
think about myself, and compare myself with others, especially with my brother,
I feel I’m a poor creature.”
</p>
<p>
“But in what way?” Kitty pursued with the same smile.
“Don’t you too work for others? What about your co-operative
settlement, and your work on the estate, and your book?...”
</p>
<p>
“Oh, but I feel, and particularly just now—it’s your
fault,” he said, pressing her hand—“that all that
doesn’t count. I do it in a way halfheartedly. If I could care for all
that as I care for you!... Instead of that, I do it in these days like a task
that is set me.”
</p>
<p>
“Well, what would you say about papa?” asked Kitty. “Is he a
poor creature then, as he does nothing for the public good?”
</p>
<p>
“He?—no! But then one must have the simplicity, the
straightforwardness, the goodness of your father: and I haven’t got that.
I do nothing, and I fret about it. It’s all your doing. Before there was
you—and <i>this</i> too,” he added with a glance towards her waist
that she understood—“I put all my energies into work; now I
can’t, and I’m ashamed; I do it just as though it were a task set
me, I’m pretending....”
</p>
<p>
“Well, but would you like to change this minute with Sergey
Ivanovitch?” said Kitty. “Would you like to do this work for the
general good, and to love the task set you, as he does, and nothing
else?”
</p>
<p>
“Of course not,” said Levin. “But I’m so happy that I
don’t understand anything. So you think he’ll make her an offer
today?” he added after a brief silence.
</p>
<p>
“I think so, and I don’t think so. Only, I’m awfully anxious
for it. Here, wait a minute.” She stooped down and picked a wild camomile
at the edge of the path. “Come, count: he does propose, he
doesn’t,” she said, giving him the flower.
</p>
<p>
“He does, he doesn’t,” said Levin, tearing off the white
petals.
</p>
<p>
“No, no!” Kitty, snatching at his hand, stopped him. She had been
watching his fingers with interest. “You picked off two.”
</p>
<p>
“Oh, but see, this little one shan’t count to make up,” said
Levin, tearing off a little half-grown petal. “Here’s the wagonette
overtaking us.”
</p>
<p>
“Aren’t you tired, Kitty?” called the princess.
</p>
<p>
“Not in the least.”
</p>
<p>
“If you are you can get in, as the horses are quiet and walking.”
</p>
<p>
But it was not worth while to get in, they were quite near the place, and all
walked on together.
</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
