<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 10</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4>Chapter 10</h4>
<p>
From that time a new life began for Alexey Alexandrovitch and for his wife.
Nothing special happened. Anna went out into society, as she had always done,
was particularly often at Princess Betsy’s, and met Vronsky everywhere.
Alexey Alexandrovitch saw this, but could do nothing. All his efforts to draw
her into open discussion she confronted with a barrier which he could not
penetrate, made up of a sort of amused perplexity. Outwardly everything was the
same, but their inner relations were completely changed. Alexey Alexandrovitch,
a man of great power in the world of politics, felt himself helpless in this.
Like an ox with head bent, submissively he awaited the blow which he felt was
lifted over him. Every time he began to think about it, he felt that he must
try once more, that by kindness, tenderness, and persuasion there was still
hope of saving her, of bringing her back to herself, and every day he made
ready to talk to her. But every time he began talking to her, he felt that the
spirit of evil and deceit, which had taken possession of her, had possession of
him too, and he talked to her in a tone quite unlike that in which he had meant
to talk. Involuntarily he talked to her in his habitual tone of jeering at
anyone who should say what he was saying. And in that tone it was impossible to
say what needed to be said to her.
</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
