<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 6</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4>Chapter 6</h4>
<p>
Princess Betsy drove home from the theater, without waiting for the end of the
last act. She had only just time to go into her dressing-room, sprinkle her
long, pale face with powder, rub it, set her dress to rights, and order tea in
the big drawing-room, when one after another carriages drove up to her huge
house in Bolshaia Morskaia. Her guests stepped out at the wide entrance, and
the stout porter, who used to read the newspapers in the mornings behind the
glass door, to the edification of the passers-by, noiselessly opened the
immense door, letting the visitors pass by him into the house.
</p>
<p>
Almost at the same instant the hostess, with freshly arranged coiffure and
freshened face, walked in at one door and her guests at the other door of the
drawing-room, a large room with dark walls, downy rugs, and a brightly lighted
table, gleaming with the light of candles, white cloth, silver samovar, and
transparent china tea-things.
</p>
<p>
The hostess sat down at the table and took off her gloves. Chairs were set with
the aid of footmen, moving almost imperceptibly about the room; the party
settled itself, divided into two groups: one round the samovar near the
hostess, the other at the opposite end of the drawing-room, round the handsome
wife of an ambassador, in black velvet, with sharply defined black eyebrows. In
both groups conversation wavered, as it always does, for the first few minutes,
broken up by meetings, greetings, offers of tea, and as it were, feeling about
for something to rest upon.
</p>
<p>
“She’s exceptionally good as an actress; one can see she’s
studied Kaulbach,” said a diplomatic attaché in the group round the
ambassador’s wife. “Did you notice how she fell down?...”
</p>
<p>
“Oh, please, don’t let us talk about Nilsson! No one can possibly
say anything new about her,” said a fat, red-faced, flaxen-headed lady,
without eyebrows and chignon, wearing an old silk dress. This was Princess
Myakaya, noted for her simplicity and the roughness of her manners, and
nicknamed <i>enfant terrible</i>. Princess Myakaya, sitting in the middle
between the two groups, and listening to both, took part in the conversation
first of one and then of the other. “Three people have used that very
phrase about Kaulbach to me today already, just as though they had made a
compact about it. And I can’t see why they liked that remark so.”
</p>
<p>
The conversation was cut short by this observation, and a new subject had to be
thought of again.
</p>
<p>
“Do tell me something amusing but not spiteful,” said the
ambassador’s wife, a great proficient in the art of that elegant
conversation called by the English <i>small talk</i>. She addressed the
attaché, who was at a loss now what to begin upon.
</p>
<p>
“They say that that’s a difficult task, that nothing’s
amusing that isn’t spiteful,” he began with a smile. “But
I’ll try. Get me a subject. It all lies in the subject. If a
subject’s given me, it’s easy to spin something round it. I often
think that the celebrated talkers of the last century would have found it
difficult to talk cleverly now. Everything clever is so stale....”
</p>
<p>
“That has been said long ago,” the ambassador’s wife
interrupted him, laughing.
</p>
<p>
The conversation began amiably, but just because it was too amiable, it came to
a stop again. They had to have recourse to the sure, never-failing
topic—gossip.
</p>
<p>
“Don’t you think there’s something Louis Quinze about
Tushkevitch?” he said, glancing towards a handsome, fair-haired young
man, standing at the table.
</p>
<p>
“Oh, yes! He’s in the same style as the drawing-room and
that’s why it is he’s so often here.”
</p>
<p>
This conversation was maintained, since it rested on allusions to what could
not be talked of in that room—that is to say, of the relations of
Tushkevitch with their hostess.
</p>
<p>
Round the samovar and the hostess the conversation had been meanwhile
vacillating in just the same way between three inevitable topics: the latest
piece of public news, the theater, and scandal. It, too, came finally to rest
on the last topic, that is, ill-natured gossip.
</p>
<p>
“Have you heard the Maltishtcheva woman—the mother, not the
daughter—has ordered a costume in <i>diable rose</i> color?”
</p>
<p>
“Nonsense! No, that’s too lovely!”
</p>
<p>
“I wonder that with her sense—for she’s not a fool, you
know—that she doesn’t see how funny she is.”
</p>
<p>
Everyone had something to say in censure or ridicule of the luckless Madame
Maltishtcheva, and the conversation crackled merrily, like a burning
faggot-stack.
</p>
<p>
The husband of Princess Betsy, a good-natured fat man, an ardent collector of
engravings, hearing that his wife had visitors, came into the drawing-room
before going to his club. Stepping noiselessly over the thick rugs, he went up
to Princess Myakaya.
</p>
<p>
“How did you like Nilsson?” he asked.
</p>
<p>
“Oh, how can you steal upon anyone like that! How you startled me!”
she responded. “Please don’t talk to me about the opera; you know
nothing about music. I’d better meet you on your own ground, and talk
about your maiolica and engravings. Come now, what treasure have you been
buying lately at the old curiosity shops?”
</p>
<p>
“Would you like me to show you? But you don’t understand such
things.”
</p>
<p>
“Oh, do show me! I’ve been learning about them at
those—what’s their names?... the bankers ... they’ve some
splendid engravings. They showed them to us.”
</p>
<p>
“Why, have you been at the Schützburgs?” asked the hostess from the
samovar.
</p>
<p>
“Yes, <i>ma chère</i>. They asked my husband and me to dinner, and told
us the sauce at that dinner cost a hundred pounds,” Princess Myakaya
said, speaking loudly, and conscious everyone was listening; “and very
nasty sauce it was, some green mess. We had to ask them, and I made them sauce
for eighteen pence, and everybody was very much pleased with it. I can’t
run to hundred-pound sauces.”
</p>
<p>
“She’s unique!” said the lady of the house.
</p>
<p>
“Marvelous!” said someone.
</p>
<p>
The sensation produced by Princess Myakaya’s speeches was always unique,
and the secret of the sensation she produced lay in the fact that though she
spoke not always appropriately, as now, she said simple things with some sense
in them. In the society in which she lived such plain statements produced the
effect of the wittiest epigram. Princess Myakaya could never see why it had
that effect, but she knew it had, and took advantage of it.
</p>
<p>
As everyone had been listening while Princess Myakaya spoke, and so the
conversation around the ambassador’s wife had dropped, Princess Betsy
tried to bring the whole party together, and turned to the ambassador’s
wife.
</p>
<p>
“Will you really not have tea? You should come over here by us.”
</p>
<p>
“No, we’re very happy here,” the ambassador’s wife
responded with a smile, and she went on with the conversation that had been
begun.
</p>
<p>
It was a very agreeable conversation. They were criticizing the Karenins,
husband and wife.
</p>
<p>
“Anna is quite changed since her stay in Moscow. There’s something
strange about her,” said her friend.
</p>
<p>
“The great change is that she brought back with her the shadow of Alexey
Vronsky,” said the ambassador’s wife.
</p>
<p>
“Well, what of it? There’s a fable of Grimm’s about a man
without a shadow, a man who’s lost his shadow. And that’s his
punishment for something. I never could understand how it was a punishment. But
a woman must dislike being without a shadow.”
</p>
<p>
“Yes, but women with a shadow usually come to a bad end,” said
Anna’s friend.
</p>
<p>
“Bad luck to your tongue!” said Princess Myakaya suddenly.
“Madame Karenina’s a splendid woman. I don’t like her
husband, but I like her very much.”
</p>
<p>
“Why don’t you like her husband? He’s such a remarkable
man,” said the ambassador’s wife. “My husband says there are
few statesmen like him in Europe.”
</p>
<p>
“And my husband tells me just the same, but I don’t believe
it,” said Princess Myakaya. “If our husbands didn’t talk to
us, we should see the facts as they are. Alexey Alexandrovitch, to my thinking,
is simply a fool. I say it in a whisper ... but doesn’t it really make
everything clear? Before, when I was told to consider him clever, I kept
looking for his ability, and thought myself a fool for not seeing it; but
directly I said, <i>he’s a fool,</i> though only in a whisper,
everything’s explained, isn’t it?”
</p>
<p>
“How spiteful you are today!”
</p>
<p>
“Not a bit. I’d no other way out of it. One of the two had to be a
fool. And, well, you know one can’t say that of oneself.”
</p>
<p>
“‘No one is satisfied with his fortune, and everyone is satisfied
with his wit.’” The attaché repeated the French saying.
</p>
<p>
“That’s just it, just it,” Princess Myakaya turned to him.
“But the point is that I won’t abandon Anna to your mercies.
She’s so nice, so charming. How can she help it if they’re all in
love with her, and follow her about like shadows?”
</p>
<p>
“Oh, I had no idea of blaming her for it,” Anna’s friend said
in self-defense.
</p>
<p>
“If no one follows us about like a shadow, that’s no proof that
we’ve any right to blame her.”
</p>
<p>
And having duly disposed of Anna’s friend, the Princess Myakaya got up,
and together with the ambassador’s wife, joined the group at the table,
where the conversation was dealing with the king of Prussia.
</p>
<p>
“What wicked gossip were you talking over there?” asked Betsy.
</p>
<p>
“About the Karenins. The princess gave us a sketch of Alexey
Alexandrovitch,” said the ambassador’s wife with a smile, as she
sat down at the table.
</p>
<p>
“Pity we didn’t hear it!” said Princess Betsy, glancing
towards the door. “Ah, here you are at last!” she said, turning
with a smile to Vronsky, as he came in.
</p>
<p>
Vronsky was not merely acquainted with all the persons whom he was meeting
here; he saw them all every day; and so he came in with the quiet manner with
which one enters a room full of people from whom one has only just parted.
</p>
<p>
“Where do I come from?” he said, in answer to a question from the
ambassador’s wife. “Well, there’s no help for it, I must
confess. From the <i>opera bouffe</i>. I do believe I’ve seen it a
hundred times, and always with fresh enjoyment. It’s exquisite! I know
it’s disgraceful, but I go to sleep at the opera, and I sit out the
<i>opera bouffe</i> to the last minute, and enjoy it. This evening....”
</p>
<p>
He mentioned a French actress, and was going to tell something about her; but
the ambassador’s wife, with playful horror, cut him short.
</p>
<p>
“Please don’t tell us about that horror.”
</p>
<p>
“All right, I won’t especially as everyone knows those
horrors.”
</p>
<p>
“And we should all go to see them if it were accepted as the correct
thing, like the opera,” chimed in Princess Myakaya.
</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
