<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 28</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-28" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4>Chapter 28</h4>
<p>
After the ball, early next morning, Anna Arkadyevna sent her husband a telegram
that she was leaving Moscow the same day.
</p>
<p>
“No, I must go, I must go”; she explained to her sister-in-law the
change in her plans in a tone that suggested that she had to remember so many
things that there was no enumerating them: “no, it had really better be
today!”
</p>
<p>
Stepan Arkadyevitch was not dining at home, but he promised to come and see his
sister off at seven o’clock.
</p>
<p>
Kitty, too, did not come, sending a note that she had a headache. Dolly and
Anna dined alone with the children and the English governess. Whether it was
that the children were fickle, or that they had acute senses, and felt that
Anna was quite different that day from what she had been when they had taken
such a fancy to her, that she was not now interested in them,—but they
had abruptly dropped their play with their aunt, and their love for her, and
were quite indifferent that she was going away. Anna was absorbed the whole
morning in preparations for her departure. She wrote notes to her Moscow
acquaintances, put down her accounts, and packed. Altogether Dolly fancied she
was not in a placid state of mind, but in that worried mood, which Dolly knew
well with herself, and which does not come without cause, and for the most part
covers dissatisfaction with self. After dinner, Anna went up to her room to
dress, and Dolly followed her.
</p>
<p>
“How queer you are today!” Dolly said to her.
</p>
<p>
“I? Do you think so? I’m not queer, but I’m nasty. I am like
that sometimes. I keep feeling as if I could cry. It’s very stupid, but
it’ll pass off,” said Anna quickly, and she bent her flushed face
over a tiny bag in which she was packing a nightcap and some cambric
handkerchiefs. Her eyes were particularly bright, and were continually swimming
with tears. “In the same way I didn’t want to leave Petersburg, and
now I don’t want to go away from here.”
</p>
<p>
“You came here and did a good deed,” said Dolly, looking intently
at her.
</p>
<p>
Anna looked at her with eyes wet with tears.
</p>
<p>
“Don’t say that, Dolly. I’ve done nothing, and could do
nothing. I often wonder why people are all in league to spoil me. What have I
done, and what could I do? In your heart there was found love enough to
forgive....”
</p>
<p>
“If it had not been for you, God knows what would have happened! How
happy you are, Anna!” said Dolly. “Everything is clear and good in
your heart.”
</p>
<p>
“Every heart has its own <i>skeletons</i>, as the English say.”
</p>
<p>
“You have no sort of <i>skeleton</i>, have you? Everything is so clear in
you.”
</p>
<p>
“I have!” said Anna suddenly, and, unexpectedly after her tears, a
sly, ironical smile curved her lips.
</p>
<p>
“Come, he’s amusing, anyway, your <i>skeleton</i>, and not
depressing,” said Dolly, smiling.
</p>
<p>
“No, he’s depressing. Do you know why I’m going today instead
of tomorrow? It’s a confession that weighs on me; I want to make it to
you,” said Anna, letting herself drop definitely into an armchair, and
looking straight into Dolly’s face.
</p>
<p>
And to her surprise Dolly saw that Anna was blushing up to her ears, up to the
curly black ringlets on her neck.
</p>
<p>
“Yes,” Anna went on. “Do you know why Kitty didn’t come
to dinner? She’s jealous of me. I have spoiled ... I’ve been the
cause of that ball being a torture to her instead of a pleasure. But truly,
truly, it’s not my fault, or only my fault a little bit,” she said,
daintily drawling the words “a little bit.”
</p>
<p>
“Oh, how like Stiva you said that!” said Dolly, laughing.
</p>
<p>
Anna was hurt.
</p>
<p>
“Oh no, oh no! I’m not Stiva,” she said, knitting her brows.
“That’s why I’m telling you, just because I could never let
myself doubt myself for an instant,” said Anna.
</p>
<p>
But at the very moment she was uttering the words, she felt that they were not
true. She was not merely doubting herself, she felt emotion at the thought of
Vronsky, and was going away sooner than she had meant, simply to avoid meeting
him.
</p>
<p>
“Yes, Stiva told me you danced the mazurka with him, and that
he....”
</p>
<p>
“You can’t imagine how absurdly it all came about. I only meant to
be matchmaking, and all at once it turned out quite differently. Possibly
against my own will....”
</p>
<p>
She crimsoned and stopped.
</p>
<p>
“Oh, they feel it directly?” said Dolly.
</p>
<p>
“But I should be in despair if there were anything serious in it on his
side,” Anna interrupted her. “And I am certain it will all be
forgotten, and Kitty will leave off hating me.”
</p>
<p>
“All the same, Anna, to tell you the truth, I’m not very anxious
for this marriage for Kitty. And it’s better it should come to nothing,
if he, Vronsky, is capable of falling in love with you in a single day.”
</p>
<p>
“Oh, heavens, that would be too silly!” said Anna, and again a deep
flush of pleasure came out on her face, when she heard the idea, that absorbed
her, put into words. “And so here I am going away, having made an enemy
of Kitty, whom I liked so much! Ah, how sweet she is! But you’ll make it
right, Dolly? Eh?”
</p>
<p>
Dolly could scarcely suppress a smile. She loved Anna, but she enjoyed seeing
that she too had her weaknesses.
</p>
<p>
“An enemy? That can’t be.”
</p>
<p>
“I did so want you all to care for me, as I do for you, and now I care
for you more than ever,” said Anna, with tears in her eyes. “Ah,
how silly I am today!”
</p>
<p>
She passed her handkerchief over her face and began dressing.
</p>
<p>
At the very moment of starting Stepan Arkadyevitch arrived, late, rosy and
good-humored, smelling of wine and cigars.
</p>
<p>
Anna’s emotionalism infected Dolly, and when she embraced her
sister-in-law for the last time, she whispered: “Remember, Anna, what
you’ve done for me—I shall never forget. And remember that I love
you, and shall always love you as my dearest friend!”
</p>
<p>
“I don’t know why,” said Anna, kissing her and hiding her
tears.
</p>
<p>
“You understood me, and you understand. Good-bye, my darling!”
</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
